He is taught about others. Other is Shaqar Tsoruradu, and his short name is Shaqar, his full name
is Tsoruradu.
He is now talking about him. He is one of the great renowned yogi, meditation, Dzogchen masters in
the 18th century.
However, he is more of a hermitic star. Hermit did not encounter more academic levels than that.
Also, in a way, he was born.
He was born in Eastern Tibet. He is generally divided into three provinces, upper province, middle
province and very low province.
Upper provinces are divided, such as wu and zang and du. All these are upper regions, from the
mountain glass to the dasa, dasa-e, all that majority, northwest part of Tibet, is known as the
upper part.
The lower part of Tibet is divided in the two centuries, particularly this time, more divided than
this time.
The Khan and the Amdus. The Khan is all of the Eastern Tibet. The majority part of the Eastern
Tibet is known as Khan.
But then, the part is the part, close the border of China, and that, again, big range, the range
area is the Amdu and the block area.
So, the Tibetan map, if you look at this hand, like this hand, and this way, this whole part is the
upper part of Tibet.
So, that is lasa and all that. Lasa and zang, this whole area is birthplace of the Tibetan culture,
birthplace of the Tibetan Buddhism.
Where there is all those great danokins are ruled in Thailand, Tibetans, and beyond the Tibetan
Thailand, tourists, the ex-centuries, all come that area.
So, therefore, culturally, religiously, spiritually, every kind of border talks about all the
center Tibet is the very center, the goal of the cultural civilization and langons.
And religions, the Buddhism, everything comes from there. So, that is lasa, all that, India.
Then, Eastern Tibet is then, as I said, the divided in the two sections, particularly these times.
I said, Middle and Far East. Middle, bottom, those far, which is now this upper part is those all
that I said.
And now, this divided in this half is then come, Eastern Tibet, come, come back to that.
And this part is then, the Andu and Golok area.
So, Hyakkah was born in Andu, Andu area, Andu, which is, this time, kind of the connected border,
Golok and Andu border, two different religions.
And this is where Hyakkah was born.
And Hyakkah's area, generally, the Hyakkah area, that Andu area, kind of like mostly is among the
poor schools of Tibet, Buddhism is mostly Galapras.
Galapras region is very popular in that Andu areas.
But however, there's slightly area, area called Rekong, Rekong, Rekong, I think R-A-R-E, sorry, C-K
-O-N-T, Rekong, maybe, this is just pronunciation.
Rekong area, that is very renowned.
Napa, Napa place, that made Nima, mostly like lay practitioners.
Lay practitioners, always kind of ancient of those people who come from Rekong area, go to Thassa.
Everybody in it, where they go to Thassa and pay homage to the Buddha, Shatamuni, very famous, very
blessed places, and go to that places.
And so many times Rekong comes also in our area, because my place is a calm area, and many times
people come back to Thassa, go to that place.
Mine is kind of in this area.
So they go this way.
Always my father used to say that Rekong's are kind of so much like Napa, they always took long
hairs, and hairs also, what's called this?
Oh, God, very different.
Gravit, Gravit or what's called?
Radlax.
Rage, almost kind of, each is two hairs of toghed become toghed.
Yeah, I saw sometimes in New York City, there's like food from the government too, so they didn't
come back to it.
There's a lot of problems. So they all come with really kind of very, also sometimes they keep the
conchial earrings.
They keep the white conchial earring, and hairs are tied up and also falling down, and with walking
stairs,
because always Rekong's very good practice of the Napa, like such as two stages, creating stage in
a complete stage practice.
Therefore, they achieve a lot of, realize that he has a reputation.
They were kind of very powerful, very, very powerful, and so should respect and appreciate when
they come to their,
they are asking, of course, this is a tradition which is established by something humble.
The travel is always supported by the families, wherever the village comes.
So they keep the food, hospitality.
But the Rekong Papas came when they said it's always good to have connection to them.
They say that.
But anyway, this Chapa was born in that age.
He was born, I think, in a regular family, family, regular family.
And his father and mother's are kind of regular average Papa practitioners.
And when he was born, he was born in 18, sorry, 1781, 1781.
And when he was born, they named him named Mauen Trashe.
Mauen Trashe.
His childhood name was Mauen Trashe, N-G-A-G-W-A-N-G, Mauen, and Trashe.
Trashe named him.
And he was very, very with the beautiful dreams.
Also, motherhood and also he was born.
There's kind of nice, good signs in the cations that came.
And that year, they had a nice year of the harvest and all those things.
And many villages also kind of used, oh, this child got good name.
That's exactly match this year, Clemety.
Clemety and good name because Trashe means acupitious, prosperity.
So this year, that year, that Clemety weather level was so nice and all that.
So they start talking, oh, this child has kind of name,
similar with the situation what happened there.
And so he's grown up and there's also in the life story,
he has a lot of nice beautiful regions and dreams and so forth.
And he began to see a lot of colors, a sparkling light in the sky and all that.
And mother said, that kind of baby, you must be hallucinating yourself.
Don't say those things.
Stay quietly, all those things.
You yield it to those parents and you say those things.
So they said that.
So he's grown up there.
And then he started to learn also very easily all the how to read, how to write,
without any difficulty, without also properly really teaching constantly.
The moment if they showed something how to read,
he start reading so roughly and so quickly.
So everybody, oh, this boy is a very smart boy.
And Edwin, I'm sorry, when he was born,
also there's very astrological that they ask, oh, please read astrology to my child.
The parents ask, and this person made astrology and read made astrology.
And the astrology said, if he stay in the house,
he will become one of the great warriors in our areas.
If he leave the home, he will become one of the great yogis.
Yogis, that also mention that.
So he's grown up and there, and he learned so easily all those things.
And also later, at 10, he started joining the makwa monasteries,
joined and practicing.
Every makwa blade is kind of amongst us that, oh, he's really so good.
He reads so well, he's doing good and all that.
So that all the older makwas start appreciating of it.
His knowledge, his wisdom, and also saying his character.
It's kind of a nice character, good character, young child, very nice character.
So everybody said, oh, he's beautiful, all that.
And on the end, Putin, he met all this in that area.
One very zoky master, renowned zoky master teacher in that area,
came to this monastery, the monastery invited him,
and his name was Jabar Dorghe, and he gave a lot of zoky teachings,
a lot of zoky teachings, a lot of meditation, instructions.
And then finally, also when he's given the zoky teachings,
this great master, zoky master, Jabar Dorghe, asked all the makwas.
Makwas said, believe everybody now must look to their nature of the mind,
try to find the nature of the mind.
He introduced that.
So everybody started looking the nature of the mind,
and everybody has really difficult to understand
what the nature of the mind is.
It has some difficulties, that is that.
And then he asked also to him, Jabar,
who is now an avantrache, child name is now an avantrache.
He called him avantrache.
Young boy asked, do you recognize what is your nature of the mind?
And he said, no, I didn't understand what the nature of the mind is.
Oh, this master said, oh, this must be yours, because too young now.
You will know that, but too young, you won't understand.
But then this master, again giving more teachings
and more instructions and practice, literally the help,
and then that he gave that and struck him again.
And Jabar, I mean, this young avantrache,
really began to understand what the nature of the mind.
And one time he went to the teacher and he told what he delighted.
Or they said, oh, that is correct, we said.
And all the other lovers said, oh, you can understand.
We still didn't struggle with what is the nature of the mind.
This must have, we need to become a college man,
free of this kind of something, that, but he understood.
So, this is the first time that he received Zoki teaching
and various stomo-nima connections.
And only at the time, actually, he said,
he was underlying devotion to the nima schools.
Even though that area, as I said,
the majority were very, very kind of yellow for schools and all that,
but he really, very much devotion toward the nima.
And also, that's what he joined with the master of makwas
and practiced journey with makwas.
And around that, at 17, so around that time,
there is another great teacher that invited him.
His name was Jami Jamso.
Jami Jamso, in the teaching, he said, he likes to say,
he was master of both old and new schools.
So, that means old school means nima schools, which were Buddhism.
New school means then Gaju, Sajja, and the Gelobu schools.
But also, I think, more leaning with the Gelobus.
So, he's very master of the new one and the Gaju.
But then, he came, he gave lot of teachings,
teachings and empowerment, transmissions.
And lot of those teachings, he really feel so kind of mind,
become so calm, peaceful, devotional.
All that become so strong.
At all that time, he started practicing more about the Gauravayam Masambhava.
He's been so strong during the Gauravayam Masambhava,
he practiced over 12 million mantara Gauravayam Masambhava.
He feel so many good about that and had a lot of beautiful dreams,
one after another.
At that time, around the age of 20s, around that time,
this, the Jami Jamso, he become so close.
He was also very special.
Spiritual teacher, teacher and become one of his root teachers.
And one day, he told, "What is your plans now?"
He's now at old age 20s, "What's your plans?
Are you thinking of marriage or what are your plans?
What do you have plans on your life?"
He told that, "I have no plans to really get stay householders.
I like to get old nation and I like to practice."
He said, "That's a wonderful idea.
One of the things, please, if you can do that, do that."
And he said, "I wish you will do that and stay in the cave and meditate like that."
He got mad gesture of meditation, "Pochatok, short time,"
and then he smiled, smiled.
And Japai himself said, "Maybe that is his projection that I will do like that."
That is.
So he feel so strongly that he like to be really ordained.
Because of that, those thoughts continue to carry in heart and mind.
But soon after, these great teachers are also connected to this.
This Japai himself, he passed away, passed away.
But however, his instructions, he never forgot.
He kept it so strongly.
And so now he's at age 20s, he like to take the old nation.
He take the old nation.
Even the modern day, he feel that strongly his head reaches,
but he take the old nations.
And then finally, finally, around that time,
then there's one again very beautiful teacher.
Teacher Jang temple, I think it's called, Jang temple.
Temple in the area, he told finally,
"I think you must go to see Maori Chudia," I think.
His name is Maori Chudia, Japai.
Japai, that's the great, I think, teacher, Zokhi master,
who looks like he is more connected to the Mongolian, Mongolian life stories.
Because these all kind of very locally, Lehigh in life,
it's not really came very famously in the Nima history,
the original.
The record is so hidden in a way, masters in the locally area.
So the Maori Chudia was, I think, in the closed Mongolian border,
and he was a householder.
I think he was also in a way, I think, leader of the areas too.
His household, his married man, married man, but he was great, ridiculous.
So he told, this Jang temple told, "You must go to see him, him, him, and the religious."
And the moment he heard his name, the Maori Chudia,
said, "Shabbar, he's like old, balls of hell, really grown, come out, out."
He just make a shiver, shivering with the thought of the devotion and joy,
eager to meet them soon.
And then one day, this Jang temple himself going to some teaching,
with his, also, authority and his disciples.
So Shabbar joined with him and went to there, and he received the teachings
from this Maori Chudia.
He gave many teachings of the Dzogchi teachings,
and then, particularly also, teachings on the Haya Giva
and Vayayavara.
He practiced. He received the old teachings.
He gave the empowerment of the, the upper empowerment, inner empowerment,
cigarette empowerment, absolutely empowerment of the Haya Giva and Vayayavara.
One after another, grade you slowly by slowly and explain the meanings of that.
So that means, maybe didn't do all those empowerment.
One day, one after another started to give teaching and structures gradually,
and then, together, he also gave other teachings,
teachings that deals with more renal sessions,
such as the renal safety or the training of the mind,
the precious human life, the empowerment of us.
And cause and efforts are inevitable.
Sometimes, samsara has hard difficulty troubles. It's not just always the same.
It's a chance.
Those are known as the best-seller's teachings.
That also aligns with the very famous teaching of the famous master Tsongkhapati,
the founder of a gala school, which is known as the graduation path
of the different stages of the, of the big and the medium
of the small practitioners or small capabilities.
It's called graduation teaching by Tsongkhapati, which is a very famous teaching.
Also, he taught those teachings, teachings to kind of connect more,
to explore the meaning of life and these situations.
And his mind becomes so full of joy, full of devotion, love and compassion,
that already he has done.
This really dances that, that power and this siddly that qualities very strongly.
So it is all those teachings.
And then, as it is in these teachings, it's talking to all the zokki teachings.
And particularly, this, generally, this farming areas,
this, this shaka, this foreigner area is, again, one of the very famous schools,
which will build, there's one great temple that came.
And many of you really heard that temple.
And his name was Ratun Todhi Doji.
Ratun Todhi Doji was very, one of the very famous new materials,
Ratun Todhi Doji, who also came same time as Tsongkhapati.
Tsongkhapati, they asked, they are contemplating.
They, what they call it?
Contemporarily.
They are contemporaries.
And they said three daughters.
Three daughters, three crazy daughters.
Three crazy, crazy daughters.
Those are known as Ratun Todhi Doji.
And Tsongkhapati, Tsongkhapati, another name is Namjia Doji.
Namjia Doji.
And Rezi Tungchio Doji.
So, Todhi Doji, Namjia Doji, and Tungchio Doji.
Those are some of the new histories and they are named three crazy legends.
Three crazy legends.
I think they are all crazy.
And they are all also connected.
They are really connected.
They are kind of in a way.
Decipheral students, they are all connected.
So, therefore, for example, this Tungchio Doji was the youngest one.
And as we read some teachings of another teaching,
because Tungchio Doji become one of the main lineage whores,
the principal lineage whores of Tsangchio Doji.
So, and also many times in some histories,
Tungchio Doji was like the biological son of Tsangchio Doji.
But anyway, Tungchio Doji was also one of the four recitals
of the lineage whores of Ratun Todhi Doji.
Ratun Todhi Doji's great teaching really so rapidly
and so strongly rooted in this "repo"
that how many churches were Shapa went.
Shapa is practicing.
So, here is a lot of teaching of this Ratun Todhi Doji
and as well as Tungchio Doji's teaching, too.
And I think this higher guru and variety teaching
is also connected with this Ratun Todhi Doji.
I think so.
That's in my case of Todhi.
But anyway, here is all this teaching.
Teachings, and then this great master,
this is Mamma Inchudya.
He called it, now he go to the Hermitage.
Hermitage and you practice.
So he practice.
Ever since, he started meditating and practicing.
His realization is growing.
His realization is deepening.
All his life story tells of how he got advanced
and developed one after another.
One after another, the tattoo practices,
toga practices, all that rapidly grow.
And then, same time he did it.
So, all then, Pasasanga of the entire day
did teaching with the Buddha.
So well, so beautiful.
Even though he didn't go exactly to study
in the academic level,
but he discovered of the inner westerns.
True westerns.
Then he discovered all those teachings.
Teachings.
And so he practiced a long time in that area
and then later on, he traveled all over.
All over Tibet.
From eastern Tibet, to then, to the other area,
to the calm, and to Thassa.
And then he went to multi-galatians.
And then he went to the government or the Nepal.
And when he paid homage to the three big stupas in Nepal,
there's very famous three stupas.
There's always Bolanat, Papashanku,
and Dhamma.
He lived in Tibet.
These three stupas, he went and paid homage.
And then again, he came back,
went to the same route in a way.
Then we came back to Thassa
and then gradually came back to his home town, homeland.
So he did a long play of the government,
but not just every day he went.
In some areas, in Chari, in southern Tibet,
he spent over a year meditating on the cave in the mountains.
Everything is a life story.
How he went, what realization, what achievement he got,
how he did.
He beautifully sang the songs.
And many times, even the great masters,
you see, he was like the incarnation of the Malarapas.
The way he spent, the way he sang is very...
And then even though he's fully over in the mountains,
but he had long hair,
he stayed as a papa, wearing white robes and long hair.
And that's what he said.
So this is what he went.
Then he returned to his home back.
And in that way, there benefited so many beings.
Along the road, along the path,
everywhere we went, at the end of the day,
when he made it in the practice,
everyone, please stay here,
and beat our teacher, and all devoted.
That's why so many beings, really, one after another,
one after another, and then he returned, as I said.
Then he entered the Mahaparin Rana,
I think in 1850, I think.
You know, 1850.
So he was born in 1781,
and entered the Mahaparin Rana,
around 1850.
So that means how much? How old?
Sixty-nine.
Sixty-nine? So around '69, I think.
Then he entered the Mahaparin Rana,
around '69.
And so that time, actually, that time already,
who is there, the great master,
such as, like, these first chinsi,
first kundra, and all those are there, too.
They did it that way.
So I think we've got to look in that way.
I think that when the shaapai is a very, like,
already great practitioner,
great enlightened beings, great masters already,
at that time, first chinsi,
first kundra, choyangnungpa,
all those are just the very young ones, young ones.
And the some great master,
and the kindipata, everybody also said that, too.
And Para Rama called, you know, Para Rama,
when he heard the beautiful repetition of the shaapai,
shaapai, he thought to go to see,
to receive the teaching from shaapai, thrown out,
but on the way to the shaapai,
and the shaapai entered the Mahaparin Rana.
He said, "So, Mahaparin Rana."
So I don't know, physically, Para Rama
would be able to meet with the shaapai Rama,
but however, he heard the beautiful repetition
of the realization of the shaapai,
and he liked to see that, that.
So that is really about the shaapai Rana.